# Populating-Cache - JS client side cache

Efficient JavaScript client side cache for data that is fetched from a backend

## Tree structure

Many caches only store certain values under given keys (or ids).
_Populating-cache_ stores values in a tree structure. Elements in this tree are identified by the path from the root of the tree to that element.
The actual values that are stored in the cache (normally) sit at the leave of this tree.

## Path

A path into the _populating-cache_ for example looks like this:

    let path = [...]

## Populate DB references (DBref)

The data returned by the backend my contain references to other entities. These references are inspired by [MongoDB DBrefs](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/database-references/#dbrefs) and the `populate()` function of the awesome [Mongoose](https://mongoosejs.com/docs/populate.html) lib.

When GET-ing a value from the cache, then DBrefs can automatically be resolved from within the cache content. Let's use the following content of a `populating-cache` as an example:

```javascript
cacheMetadata = {
	"posts": [
		{
			_id: 4711,
			text: "This is an example post"
			comments: [
				{ 
					_id: 101, 
					commentText: "This is a comment by user1", 
					createdBy: {				
						$refPath: "users/901"	// referenced `path` to other entity in cache
					}
				}
			]
		}
	],
	"users": [
		{	// This is the referenced user
			_id: 901,
			email: "user1@domain.com"
		},
	]
}
```

A simple list of `posts`. Each post can have `comments`. And each comment is `createdBy` a `user`. 
But the createdBy-user is not stored again and again for every comment. Instead, users are cached seperately under the top-level key `users`. Each comment then _references_ one user. The `$ref` attribute is the name of the top-level key. And `$id` is the \_id of the user under that key that created the comment.

When a path in a call to `get(path)` spans a DBref, then this ref is automatically resolved:

```javascript
	let path = [{posts:4711}, {comments: 101}, "createdBy", "email"]
	let result = cache.get(path)		
	// result is now "user1@domain.com"
```

When a DBref is resolved, then of course the TTL of the referenced target entity (in our example `user/901`) is taken into account. If that user's data in the cache is expired, then a query for that user will be sent to the backend. The response of the backend will be used to update the user data in the cache. The TTL in the metadata will be refreshed. And this updated data will be used to populate the DBref.

```javascript
cacheMetadata = {
	"posts": [...],
	"users": [
		{
			_id: 901,
			ttl: 1456  //  <= EXPIRED!
		},
		{
			_id: 902,
			ttl: 25263426457// +5 days
		},
	]
}
```

<div style="border: 1px solid #F99; padding: 5px">
Population does not change the DBref element. In the cache, the DBref will not be replaced by the referenced data. Only the value returned by `get(path)` will contain the resolved reference.
</div>

# API

<!-- Generated by documentation.js. Update this documentation by updating the source code. -->

### Table of Contents

-   [PopulatingCache](#populatingcache)
    -   [Parameters](#parameters)
    -   [put](#put)
        -   [Parameters](#parameters-1)
    -   [get](#get)
        -   [Parameters](#parameters-2)
    -   [getOrFetch](#getorfetch)
        -   [Parameters](#parameters-3)
    -   [delete](#delete)
        -   [Parameters](#parameters-4)
    -   [getCacheData](#getcachedata)
    -   [getCacheMetadata](#getcachemetadata)
    -   [emptyCache](#emptycache)
    -   [expireOldTtls](#expireoldttls)
    -   [shouldCallBackend](#shouldcallbackend)
        -   [Parameters](#parameters-5)
    -   [path2rest](#path2rest)
        -   [Parameters](#parameters-6)

## PopulatingCache

Doogies unbelievably clever implementation of a client side cache.

    cache.get("cachedPrimitive")							// => 4711
    cache.get("posts")												// => Anything thats cached under object key "posts", e.g. the Array of posts
    cache.get(["posts", "category"])					// => returns this.cache.posts.category  (one value)
    cache.get(["usersById", "4711"])					// => the this.cache.userById["4711"]
    cache.get([{posts: 1}])											// <= the post with id 1 from the array of posts
    cache.get([{posts: 5}, {comments: "adfbe435d"}, "createdBy", "email"])		// walk the tree and populate all necessary references

### Parameters

-   `fetchFunc`  
-   `config`  

### put

Cache `value` under the given `path` in this cache. The value may then be retrieved back with a call to `get(path)`.
All intermediate objects along the path will be created in the cache if necessary.
Then `value` is stored as the leaf at the end of path with the given `ttl` or the configured `defaultTTLms`.

#### Parameters

-   `path` **[Array](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)** path under which the `value` shall be stored in the cache
-   `value` **Any** The value to store in the cache.
-   `ttl` **[Number](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number)** time to live / how long value can be stored in the cache. Defaults to config.defaultTTLms (optional, default `this.config.defaultTTLms`)

Returns **[Object](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object)** the cache instance, so that calls to put() can be chained: `myCache.put("foo", "bar").put("foo2", "baz2")`

### get

Fetch a value from the cache. If the value isn't in the cache or if it is expired, then the backend will be queried for the value under `path`.
If `force==true` then the value will always be queried from the backend.
When the backend is called, then the returned value will again be stored in the cache and its TTL will be updated.

#### Parameters

-   `path`  array that forms the path to the value that shall be fetched. 
        Each array element can be one of three formats: 
          \- a plain "attributeName" for object properties in the cache.
          \- { arrayAttr: "abde3f"} for the array element with that id.
          \- "array[index]" for array elements. Index must be a positive. 
        For example: [{posts:5}, {comments:42}] is the comment with id 42 of the post with id 5
        For a REST backend this can be translated to the REST resource at  /posts/5/comments/42
-   `force`  Force calls to backend, even when cache element is not yet expired (optional, default `false`)
-   `populate`  Automatically populate DBrefs from this cache if possible. (optional, default `true`)

Returns **any** (A Promise that resolves to) the fetched value. Either directly from the cache or from the backend.

### getOrFetch

This method decides if the backend needs to be called to fetch a given value.
The backend will be called, IF

-   cacheElem is null, ie. not yet in the cache
-   cacheElem is expired, because its metadata.ttl is in the past.
-   or when force === true

When the backend is call, then the returned value is PUT() back into the cache
with and updated TTL.

This method will only be called for leaf elements at the end of path. We never query for "in between" elements along a path.

#### Parameters

-   `path` **[Array](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)** The full path to cacheElem
-   `cacheElem` **any** the leaf element at the end of path or null if not in the cache yet
-   `metadata` **any** metadata for cacheElem
-   `force` **any** always call backend if true

### delete

Delete an element from the cache. It's value will be set to undefined.

#### Parameters

-   `path` **[Array](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)** path to the element that shall be deleted

### getCacheData

Get (a direct reference!) to all the data in the cache.
The cacheData is exactly as returned by `fetchFunc(path)`

### getCacheMetadata

While you `put` values into the cache, populating cache automatically
creates a second parallel tree of metadata next to the `cacheData`.
The metadata contains the time to life TTL for each leave element.

### emptyCache

Completely empty the cache. This also clears out all metadata.

### expireOldTtls

Recursively walk through the cacheData and delete all expired elements.
You MAY call this from time to time to optimize the cache's memory consumption

### shouldCallBackend

Check if we need to call the backend for this cacheElem.

-   If cacheElem is undefined or null then of course we must call the backend.
-   If cacheElem exists and is not the last elem in path (the leaf), then do NOT call the backend.
    We only call the backend for leafs in the path.
-   If cacheElem is expired, ie. its TTL is in the past, the call the backend.
-   Otherwise cacheElem exists and is not expired. Then call the backend depending on the `force` value.

#### Parameters

-   `i` **[Number](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number)** Index in path
-   `path` **[Array](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)** Path along the tree of entities. The leaf of this path shall be fetched.
-   `force` **[Boolean](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Boolean)** Force call to backend. Skip the cache
-   `cacheElem`  
-   `metadata` **[Object](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object)** subtree of this.cacheMetadata for element path[i]
-   `cache` **[Object](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object)** subtree of this.cacheData for element path[i]

### path2rest

Convert the given path to a REST URL path.

#### Parameters

-   `path` **[Array](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)** a populating-cache path array
